So each time we turned the tape over, then we had
that 15-second protective delay.
Now, first, Professor Fleming, I'd like to know
what interested you in the sea. Why did you choose
the sea as a profession? Well, I was studying as a
chemist at the University of British Columbia and
completed my bachelor's degree in 1929 and stayed
on at the at the University of British Columbia,
take a master's degree in chemistry. And this, as
you should recognize, was the beginning of the
Depression. And it was quite obvious to me that
there were more chemists than were going to be
needed, and that it was particularly difficult to
obtain any sort of graduate student support in
chemistry. And I had become somewhat bored with
the field of chemistry and thought I'd better seek
some other area. And I'd grown up right by the
water, and many of my friends were essentially
marine biologists. And I happened to hear about
this field called oceanography, and it seemed
very intriguing. So I was able to obtain a research
assistantship at Scripps Institution.
California in 1931 down there.
Had you not been to Scripps before you acquired it?
No. In those days one didn't travel very much. It
was a major expedition to get to Southern
California. Actually, I went down by ship. Did you
know with whom you wished to work at Scripps when
you went?
Really I expected to work in chemistry and at that
time the chemist at Scripps was Eric Moberg and I
did essentially work with him for a number of years
although I moved out of the field of chemical
oceanography after a few years and became
involved in sort of descriptive physical
oceanography. How long were you at Scripps? Well,
I was there as a graduate student for four years,
and I completed my PhD in 1935, and then was kept on
in a sort of research capacity for one year just as
an assistant. And then in 1936, I was appointed as
an instructor on the faculty at Scripps, and this
was at the time that Harold Sverdrup had just been
appointed and came in as the director, which he did
in September of 1936. When did you first acquire
the idea of the textbook that became the standard
in the field? Well, this came more or less by
accident, as a lot of these things do, that Scripps
had never had any particular program in sort of
education, and when Harold Spadrup came as the
director, he felt that we ought to be doing more in
this line, and he started some summer courses in
oceanography, sort of a general survey course,
and he and Martin Johnson and I were the principal
lecturers, and The Prentice Hall Publishing
Company apparently heard about this through
their grapevine and came down and suggested that
we write down our lecture notes. And being all
innocent, we said, yes, we would be willing to do
so. And it was out of this summer course in
oceanography that that the volume on the oceans
finally appeared. It took us about three years to
write it, and it was finished in 1942. What sort of
work were you doing at Scripps while you were
there? Oh, I went down and, do you mean as a graduate
student? As a graduate student and then old as a...
I was sort of a jack of all trades and have been, I
think, all my career. But My principal interest
was originally in some sort of chemical work, and I
did some work on the calcium carbonate problem,
something on nutrients, and used to participate
in the a very limited sort of seagoing program we
had in those days. And then in 1932, I was given a
leave, in a sense, and went up to Berkeley to the
University of California to get a little bit more
coursework and to prepare for my general
examinations. When I came back to Scripps from
there, early in 1933,
I was told that the Navy wanted somebody to go down
to Central America to carry out some
oceanographic work on board one of the naval
vessels. And so I went down and joined the USS
Hannibal, which was a vessel used by the then Navy
Hydrographic Office and spent several months
down off the west coast of Panama and Costa Rica
doing just sort of the field routine, which had
already been sort of planned. And when I got back to
La Jolla, the said, well, why don't you write up the
results? And so this actually turned out to be my
doctoral thesis and got me into sort of
descriptive physical oceanography. That was
what I was interested in, is when did you get this
first descriptive oceanography that you were in
in the early 30s? And you stayed with that, though,
for two or three years. I think of you more there
than as a chemical oceanographer. Oh, yes. I
haven't really done any chemical oceanography.
since that time, really, because as
soon as I had finished up my thesis on this
particular material, why, Dr. Sverdrup had
arrived and
was very anxious to start a more kind of systematic
program of field work. And this developed in a sort
of indirect way, as many of these enterprises did,
in that the California Fish and Game Commission
was, at that time, concerned with the problem of
the distribution and abundance of the California
sardines and wanted to do some oceanographic
work. made available to Scripps the use of a small
patrol vessel called the Bluefin. And in the early
spring, and I think it extended up into the summer
of 1937, we got our first sort of systematic series
of observations off the Southern California
coast. this continued and so on, so he became very
much involved in essentially the regional
oceanography off the coast of California. Who
worked in the sardine fisheries activities with
you? Well, we just did a
certain amount of work on conventional physical
oceanography, and a little bit of chemistry and
some work on the plankton. We never became at that
time directly involved in any of the fish studies,
but the federal government had also become very
much involved in the problem, and the two people
that we dealt with a good deal were Alton B. Setty
and Lionel Walford, both of what was then, I think,
the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, although
they changed their names often, but they were very
much involved in the fisheries aspect and also the
state fisheries. And the man in the state
fisheries with whom we work very closely is now at
USC, is Richard B. Tibby, who you run across, who is
and he came down after a year or two and actually
finished his Ph.D. at Scripps on the oceanography
of the California coast. Now, this is really the
first time the Pacific coast is being mapped, is
when you're mapping it now in these several years.
Were you surprised about certain things? Well, I
think it's yes and no.
that because of the interest in the sardine
problem, the region was more or less prescribed
for us. And yet within that area, which extended
off the coast, I imagine about a couple of hundred
miles, they wanted considerable detail. So I
think one of the things that was rather original
was the fact that we made repeated studies on a
fairly closely spaced network of stations. And
this showed details that were essentially
unanticipated, certainly. And also, Professor
Sverdrup in particular became very interested in
the role of upwelling as it affected these waters
to the south of Point Conception. And I think we had
some of the first sort of evidence on the existence
of eddies in the area that these sort of features
had not been identified before.
Who was joining you in Scripps between, let's say,
35 on? You seem to have a whole series of people come
in at Scripps about this time. Who go on?
The biggest changes occurred, I feel, in about
1931,
which was just about the time I went there as a
graduate student, and that Dr. Vaughn, who was the
director, had been able to get some additional
funds, and he had a really a very imaginative sort
of view of what ought to be done at that time. And he
added two faculty people, Claude Zobel in
microbiology and Dennis Fox essentially in
physiology and biochemistry. And this
represented a major kind of shift in what was going
on at Scripps. The physical area and the field
work, there were no sort of major additions to the
faculty and staff, except during these years we
had considerable support from people who were
provided to the institution under the WPA, the
Works Progress Administration. One of the
curious things is that the illustrations in my
thesis were all drawn by a man whose background had
been in architecture and was being supported on
these federal funds, and all my graphs looked like
architectural drawings. But we had considerable
staff support, technician support in those days,
people who were assigned to scripts under the WPA
program. Gene LaFond was one person who worked
very closely with this program, with Mr. Drip and
I, and that was about it. Things weren't quite as
large as they are today. Did you find much exchange
among the faculty in that time? In other words,
were you able to come to Let's say people like
Martin Johnson and talk about your problems, many
meetings, this sort of thing? Not particularly.
As far as the kind of research work was concerned,
everybody did their own particular job. But as I
mentioned a few minutes ago, we did collect
plankton samples on these cruises. the
phytoplankton were examined by Mr. Allen and his
associate, Easter Cup, and Martin Johnson and his
assistants and students did the work on the
zooplankton. So, yes, and the group was small
enough that you did sort of see everybody
frequently, and there was a good deal of exchange,
yes. But it was not a, it didn't by any means involve
all of the activities at Scripps or all the
faculty.
When does Roger Revell get to Scripps? Well, he
arrived a month or two after I did in the summer of
1931 and came down to, uh, work on the sediment
samples that had been collected on the cruise of
the non-magnetic vessel Carnegie during, I think
it was 1928 and 29, and he was to carry out this
examination
of the material under the direction of Dr.
Vaughan, but He also got interested in a number of
things, and we worked together on several
problems, one of them concerning the solubility
of calcium carbonate and the precipitation of
calcium carbonate in seawater. And he also used to
participate in some of these cruises that we made
before the sardines Investigations began in
1937. In fact, he and I used to take the research
vessel out most of the time when I acted as captain
and deckhand. We had only a one-man crew who was the
engineer on the small vessel that was available.
It's been suggested to me recently that one of the
problems with the modern oceanographers, they
don't get their feet wet, so to speak. They don't
spend enough time on vessels. Would you agree with
that? Well, yes and no. I think the
character of the work at sea has changed as the
vessels have become much larger and as the
equipment has become much more complex, and that
the vessel we had The Times I'm talking about,
prior to the sardine surveys, was just called the
Scripps. And she was a 55-foot trawler-type
vessel with a one-man permanent crew. And so the
graduate students in general used to take out and
run the ship, essentially. navigate as necessary
do all of the sampling do all of the sort of deckhand
functions and as well as work on the samples after
they were back in the laboratory now it's more like
I have the feeling as a graduate student goes out
it's more or less like going on an ocean liner that
they're just in a sense kind of a passenger on a big a
relatively large vessel, they have very little to
do with the planning or with the navigation, the
operation of the vessels at sea, and usually don't
know very much about what's going on except the
specific sort of project they're engaged in. So I
think we've lost something in this process, and
there's
still some I think activities of the type that I'm
reminiscing about that are conducted in some
near-shore work at various institutions. But
still, I find the students have a very sort of
narrow concept of what goes on. There we go. About
15 seconds here. What do you mean? It pauses now?
Yeah, I've got 15 seconds. delay to make sure we
don't overtake.
Now, it's also been suggested that with the advent
of the computer in terms of collecting data and
evaluating it and so forth, particularly
concerning physical oceanography, that the
physical oceanographer loses touch with what
he's doing. Would you agree with that? Well, I
certainly would. And that's one of the things that
has bothered me a good deal. in recent years is the
capability to take more data and to use a computer
for various processing, routine processing,
compilation, manipulation, compilation
analysis, plotting, and so on.
Younger scientists don't have the kind of
familiarity with the specific information that I
think we had in years gone by. I think I can say with
some confidence that I used to know every
observation that had ever been made in most of the
Pacific Ocean. And there weren't very many, but I
knew every one and could
I knew whether it was good or bad. I knew how it was
related to other observations and so on. And this
kind of an intimacy is certainly being lost today,
where students may not even see the set of original
data in any form. Times have changed, and I'm
harking back to a condition that will probably
never prevail again. I think something has been
lost here.
Now, when you began to plan your voyages, let's say
around 37 or 38, I'm interested in how you made your
decisions, where to go, what to do. Was it pretty
well dictated by the fisheries itself, or were you
pretty free to do what you wanted to do? No, I would
say that we were fairly free.
talking only in terms of really one more or less
specific evaporation, but within a rather
general frame of reference, why we were allowed to
plan our own program, and of course it was
discussed with Alton Setty and Lionel Offord and
others that were involved, But in general, I think
we decided what should be done and how it should be
done, where, when, and so on. And that there
was a considerable freedom in choice here in what
we did. The other thing we were able to do at that
time was to work out fairly sort of comprehensive
programs as far as types of information gathered
and so on. It was certainly a case always of trying
to optimize what we could do because we had very
limited resources in terms of money and people and
equipment. So we had to select fairly carefully
what we felt we could do. I have to remember that
most of this was even before the days of the old
mechanical bathy thermograph, the BT. In fact, we
had the experience of working with I think it was BT
number 5, which was sent to us in the spring of 1941
by Woods Hole when nobody even knew whether the
instrument would function properly and had no
kind of experience with the kind of information
you could get with a device of that kind.
When you were at Scripps in this period, was there
much contact with international oceanography?
Did you have any international oceanographers
come through? Yes, we used to have quite a few
visitors, at least relatively speaking, in that
Professor Vaughn, who was the director from,
actually I think it was from 1924 until 1936, had
been relatively active in sort of international
ocean matters and had a number of friends and
professional friends in foreign countries,
Japan and Europe and so on, and we were one of the
relatively few places that anyone interested in
the ocean would come to visit in the United States.
What I'm trying to say is there weren't very many
places to visit. So we saw a good many of the
distinguished people from other areas, and then
when Professor Sverdrup came in, he had a very
close bonds with many, many people in different
fields and different countries, and this sort of
continued in a way.
I can remember in particular, we had one or more
visits from Helund Hansen, a Norwegian
oceanographer.
So we had reasonably good, I feel, in some ways,
maybe better contacts than we have today. Now,
when you're involved in this in the 30s, was there
sort of a sense of excitement about moving out
towards a new frontier? No, I don't think so. It was
all good fun, but we didn't see any great manifest
destiny or anything for it. We didn't think in
terms of national ocean policy and so on. We just
thought there were interesting scientific
problems to be solved. And as I look back on it now,
that period really before the war at Scripps, we
were very much in sort of ivory tower, although as
I've already indicated, we were beginning to move
into what might be called applied oceanography as
it was related to some of these fisheries
problems. But ordinarily, though, this is still
primarily research for its own sake rather than
sort of the applied research that comes out
between 41 and 45? Oh,
yes. The funding of the of the institution at that
time, Scripps Institution, was basically all
through the University of California, since the
state funds reaching us through the university,
except that in connection with the sardine
investigations, the federal
fisheries agency did provide money to help
operate the vessel, which was the E.W. Scripps at
that time. This is after the bluefin. We're
getting in a number of omissions and so on, and
trying to trace the history of these things. But we
were all We did not consider, as one would probably
do now, that we were dependent on federal funding
to function. We were essentially supported
through the academic funds from the University of
California.
There was also support from some of the members of
the Scripps family, which was available at that
time. There has also been discussion that perhaps
the nature of oceanography has changed for the
worse, and that they have lost sort of a jack of all
trades approach. Would you agree with that? Well,
this is, I think, where personal prejudices come
in. And I would agree that I feel that one of the
things that attracted me to the field originally
was the fact that we were able to deal with a what I
consider is essentially a sort of a unified
system, and where we could cross the disciplinary
boundaries, which we did very freely at that time,
between chemistry, physical aspects, biology,
geology, without anybody raising an eyebrow. And
we did try and deal with the systems in a... well as
we could as essentially unified systems. And I
think today it's become fragmented again by
specialization, which is partly, I think, the
result of the interests of the scientists who come
into the field, but it's also being encouraged in a
sense by the way in which the federal funding has
become more and more specialized and fragmented.
And I don't consider this desirable at all. Most of
my efforts in recent years have been to try and
bring the subject matter back together again as
much as I can.